Adds more details to overview, basic workflow, and How it works section (#19508)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/workers/static-assets/index.mdx

```js {13}
// index.js

export default {
	async fetch(request, env) {
		const url = new URL(request.url);

		if (url.pathname.startsWith("/api/")) {
			return new Response(JSON.stringify({ name: "Cloudflare" }), {
				headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
			});
		}

		return env.ASSETS.fetch(request);
	},
};
```

### Routing behavior

By default, if a requested URL matches a file in the static assets directory, that file will always be served — without running Worker code. If no matching asset is found and a Worker is configured, the request will be processed by the Worker instead.

- If no Worker is set up, the [`not_found_handling`](/workers/static-assets/routing/#2-not_found_handling-1) setting in your Wrangler configuration determines what happens next. By default, a `404 Not Found` response is returned.

- If a Worker is configured and a request does not match a static asset, the Worker will handle the request. The Worker can choose to pass the request to the asset binding (through `env.ASSETS.fetch()`), following the `not_found_handling` rules.

> This default routing behavior can be configured and overridden. For example, if you have a Single Page Application and want to serve `index.html` for all unmatched routes, you can set `not_found_handling = "single-page-application"`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure and override this default routing behaviour. For example, if you have a Single Page Application and want to serve `index.html` for all unmatched routes, you can set `not_found_handling = "single-page-application"`:
```

<WranglerConfig>

    ```toml
    	[assets]
    	directory = "./dist"
    	not_found_handling = "single-page-application"

    	```

</WranglerConfig>

If you want the Worker code to execute before serving an asset (for example, to protect an asset behind authentication), you can set `run_worker_first = true`.

<WranglerConfig>

    ```toml
    	[assets]
    	directory = "./dist"
    	run_worker_first = true

    	```

</WranglerConfig>

<LinkCard
	title="Routing options"
	href="/workers/static-assets/routing/#routing-configuration"
	description="Learn more about how you can customize routing behavior."
/>

### Caching behavior

Cloudflare provides automatic caching for static assets across its network, ensuring fast delivery to users worldwide. When a static asset is requested, it is automatically cached for future requests.

- **First Request:** When an asset is requested for the first time, it is fetched from storage and cached at the nearest Cloudflare location.

> - **Subsequent Requests:** If a request for the same asset reaches a data center that does not have it cached, Cloudflare's [tiered caching system](/cache/how-to/tiered-cache/) allows it to be retrieved from a nearby cache rather than going back to storage. This improves cache hit ratios and reduces latency, and reduces unnecessary origin fetches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Subsequent Requests:** If a request for the same asset reaches a data center that does not have it cached, Cloudflare's [tiered caching system](/cache/how-to/tiered-cache/) allows it to be retrieved from a nearby cache rather than going back to storage. This improves cache hit ratio, reduces latency, and reduces unnecessary origin fetches.
```

## Try it out

#### 1. Create a new Worker project

```sh
npm create cloudflare@latest -- my-dynamic-site
```

**For setup, select the following options**:

- For _What would you like to start with?_, choose `Framework`.
- For _Which framework would you like to use?_, choose `React`.
- For _Which language do you want to use?_, choose `TypeScript`.
- For _Do you want to use git for version control_?, choose `Yes`.
- For _Do you want to deploy your application_?, choose `No` (we will be making some changes before deploying).

After setting up the project, change the directory by running the following command:

```sh
cd my-dynamic-site
```

#### 2. Build project

Run the following command to build the project:

```sh
npm run build
```

We should now see a new directory `/dist` in our project, which contains the compiled assets:

<FileTree>
- package.json
- index.html
- ...
- dist Asset directory
	- ... Compiled assets
- src
	- ...
- ...

</FileTree>

> In the next step, we'll tell Cloudflare where to find our compiled assets in a Wrangler configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step, we use a Wrangler configuration file to allow Cloudflare to locate our compiled assets.
```

#### 3. Add a Wrangler configuration file (`wrangler.toml` or `wrangler.json`)

<WranglerConfig>

    ```toml
    	name = "my-spa"
    	compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
    	[assets]
    	directory = "./dist"
    	```

</WranglerConfig>

> **Notice the `[assets]` block**: here we've specified our directory where Cloudflare can find our compiled assets (`./dist`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Notice the `[assets]` block**: here we have specified our directory where Cloudflare can find our compiled assets (`./dist`).
```

Our project structure should now look like this:

<FileTree>
- package.json
- index.html
- **wrangler.toml** Wrangler configuration
- ...
- dist Asset directory
	- ... Compiled assets
- src
	- ...
- ...

</FileTree>

#### 4. Deploy with Wrangler

```sh
npx wrangler deploy
```

Our project is now deployed on Workers! But we can take this even further, by adding an **API Worker**.

#### 5. Adjust our Wrangler configuration

Replace the file contents of our Wrangler configuration with the following:

<WranglerConfig>

    ```toml
    	name = "my-spa"
    	main = "src/api/index.js"
    	compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
    	[assets]
    	directory = "./dist"
    	binding = "ASSETS"
    	not_found_handling = "single-page-application"

    	```

</WranglerConfig>

> **Let's look at our changes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have edited the Wrangler file in the following ways:
```

> - We've added `main = "src/api/index.js"` to tell Cloudflare where to find our Worker code.
> - We've added an `ASSETS` binding, which our Worker code can use to fetch and serve assets.
> - We've enabled routing for Single Page Applications, which ensures that unmatched routes (such as `/dashboard`) serve our `index.html`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added `main = "src/api/index.js"` to tell Cloudflare where to find our Worker code.
- Added an `ASSETS` binding, which our Worker code can use to fetch and serve assets.
- Enabled routing for Single Page Applications, which ensures that unmatched routes (such as `/dashboard`) serve our `index.html`.
```

> <Aside type="note">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
```

> By default, Cloudflare serves a `404 Not Found` to unmatched routes. In order to have the frontend handle routing instead of the server, you must enable `not_found_handling = "single-page-application"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Cloudflare serves a `404 Not Found` to unmatched routes. To have the frontend handle routing instead of the server, you must enable `not_found_handling = "single-page-application"`.
```

> </Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::
```

#### 5. Create a new directory `/api`, and add an `index.js` file

Copy the contents below into the index.js file.

```js {13}
// api/index.js

export default {
	async fetch(request, env) {
		const url = new URL(request.url);

		if (url.pathname.startsWith("/api/")) {
			return new Response(JSON.stringify({ name: "Cloudflare" }), {
				headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
			});
		}

		return env.ASSETS.fetch(request);
	},
};
```

> **Let's breakdown what this Worker does:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Consider what this Worker does:**
```

> - Our Worker receives an HTTP request and extracts the URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Our Worker receives a HTTP request and extracts the URL.
```

	LinkButton,
	Stream,
	Flex,
	WranglerConfig,
	Steps,
} from "~/components";

> Cloudflare Workers simplify hosting and serving static resources (such as HTML, CSS, images, and other resources) by combining a globally distributed CDN with lightweight, serverless backend logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can upload static assets (HTML, CSS, images and other files) as part of your Worker, and Cloudflare will handle caching and serving them to web browsers.```

Say directly what it is

> 

Reviewer 2: This needs:

<img width="741" alt="Screenshot 2025-01-29 at 9 56 38 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dc1fcf14-3654-4fb9-abe0-b244af24d333" />

How to bring ^ this way way up the page, and onto this page?

ex: 

1. add directory, put <this line> in wrangler.toml
2. by default, when there is a request to `/path` to your Worker, if there is a file in the directory called `path.html` — that file will be returned to the client, and your Worker's code will not run. If there is no match, your Worker's code will run.
3. If you want to run code before serving, set <this config> and then you can write code like this (refs <screenshot>, show the code sample)

Need to lead with something that meets the need of — show me what this actually is and help me understand as an engineer building things.

> With Workers, you can:

Reviewer 2: This is sub page within Workers. Describe the static assets parts, jump into _what_ this actually is and show vs tell

> - **Host static sites** or **Single Page Applications (SPAs)** across Cloudflare's network.

Reviewer 2: link to frameworks / mention frameworks somewhere up at the top

- **Add backend logic** (such as APIs or custom middleware) alongside your assets without needing a dedicated server.

- Serve content to users with **low latency** using **built-in caching** for faster load times for users worldwide.

- **Build full-stack applications** using Cloudflare's storage solutions, such as [R2](/r2/) for object storage, [KV](/kv/) for distributed key-value storage, [D1](/d1/) for relational databases, and [Durable Objects](/durable-objects/) for stateful, consistent storage and coordination. You can also connect to existing databases using [Hyperdrive](/hyperdrive/)

---

## Basic Workflow

> From a high-level, here's how you can get started with deploying a simple static site on Workers:

Reviewer 2: See comment above, start with foundation of what this is and how it works just with directory and with showing example of config and code.

<Steps>
1. Build your static assets.
 	```sh
	npm run build
	```
	<Details header="Don't have an existing project?">
	You can quickly scaffold a project using [Vite](https://vite.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project):
	```sh
	npm create vite@latest
	```

> 	And follow the prompts! For first-timers, just select `vanilla` as your template.

Reviewer 2: This is good but can there be example in `npm create cloudflare@latest` that gets you fully setup?

	</Details>
2. Add and configure a Wrangler configuration file (`wrangler.toml` or `wrangler.json`)
	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		```
	</WranglerConfig>

	In this configuration file, you define the **directory** where Cloudflare can find your built assets that need to be uploaded. To do this, we've added an `[assets]` block, and specified the `directory` as `dist/`.

3. Deploy with Wrangler
	```sh
	npx wrangler deploy
	```

	And let Cloudflare Workers handle asset uploading, routing, and caching automatically!

</Steps>

---

## How it works

> When you deploy your app with Wrangler, it deploys both your Worker script and your static assets in a single operation. This deployment operates as a tightly integrated "unit" running across Cloudflare's network, combining static file hosting, custom logic, and global caching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you deploy a Worker to Cloudflare that has static assets, it deploys both your Worker's code and your static assets as one integrated "unit" running across Cloudflare's network, combining static file hosting, custom logic, and caching.
```

Within this deployment, the Worker has two primary responsibilies:

1. **Asset handling**
2. **Running custom logic**

> ### Asset handling

Reviewer 2: Would suggest cutting or tightening paragraphs below

> Static asset hosting on Workers allows you to serve files such as HTML, JavaScript, CSS, images, and other resources directly from Cloudflare's global network. This setup eliminates the need for a traditional web server, simplifying deployment and optimizing performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Think repeating?

The **assets directory** specified in your Wrangler configuration file is central to this design. During deployment, Wrangler automatically uploads the files from this directory to Cloudflare's infrastructure. Once deployed, requests for these assets are routed efficiently to locations closest to your users.

This approach ensures that static files like `index.html`, JavaScript bundles, stylesheets, and images are served with minimal latency. Workers efficiently handle file resolution, meaning they serve files as-is from the defined directory, or return a fallback response (such as an error or default page) when a requested file is not found.

> <Aside type="tip">

Reviewer 2: Tip suggests this is nice-to-have optional, would expect somewhere to enumerate — what are the configuration options and what do they mean?

	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"

		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		not_found_handling = "single-page-application"
		```
	</WranglerConfig>

</Aside>

### Running custom logic

One of the defining features of Cloudflare Workers is the ability to execute custom backend logic alongside your static assets. This logic can be used for handling requests, modifying responses, or implementing custom functionality for your application.

For example, you can implement the following directly in your Worker:

- **Dynamic routing:** Inspect incoming requests and route them based on their paths or headers. For example, you can route requests to `/api` to custom API logic, while static files are automatically served from your specified directory.

- **API endpoints:** Define endpoints to handle user requests, fetch data from external APIs, or interact with databases.

- **Response modifications:** Modify responses dynamically, such as adding headers, compressing payloads, or injecting data into static content.

> - **Stateful logic:** For scenarios requiring consistent state across requests, you can use [Durable Objects](/durable-objects/). Durable objects allow you to maintain state for use-cases such as real-time collaboration, session storage, global counters, and more.

Reviewer 2: I think you are re-explaining Workers here in context of a page where the goal is to explain static assets — and surrounding pages / content can do this. Would cut

> <Aside type="tip">

Reviewer 2: Similar to above — just have section that explains configuration options and what they do

And _these_ sections are where the use cases are _great_ to go into (like the example you have below about putting some asset behind auth)

You can change the default routing behavior (which prioritizes serving assets ahead of running Worker code) so that your [Worker code runs before an asset is served](/workers/static-assets/routing/#invoking-worker-script-ahead-of-assets/).

For example, if you want to protect an asset behind authentication, you can override the routing behavior in your Wrangler configuration file:

	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"

		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		binding = "ASSETS"
		run_worker_first = true
		```
	</WranglerConfig>

</Aside>

### Caching static assets

Cloudflare provides automatic caching for static assets across its network, ensuring fast delivery to users worldwide. When a static asset is requested, it is automatically cached for future requests.

#### Cache behavior

- **First Request:** When an asset is requested for the first time, it is fetched from storage and cached at the nearest location.

> - **Subsequent Requests:** Future requests for the same asset are served directly from the cache, significantly reducing latency.

Reviewer 2: "Every time you deploy an asset to Pages, the asset remains cached on the Cloudflare CDN until your next deployment."

https://developers.cloudflare.com/pages/configuration/serving-pages/

helpful to be specific and concrete about "until next deployment"

	LinkButton,
	Stream,
	Flex,
	WranglerConfig,
	Steps,
} from "~/components";

> Cloudflare Workers simplify hosting and serving static like (such as HTML, CSS, images, and other resources) by combining a globally distributed CDN with lightweight, serverless backend logic.

Reviewer 3: "and serving static like by"
```suggestion
Cloudflare Workers simplify hosting and serving static resources (such as HTML, CSS, images, and other resources) by combining a globally distributed CDN with lightweight, serverless backend logic.
```

With Workers, you can:

- **Host static sites** or **Single Page Applications (SPAs)** across Cloudflare's network.

- **Add backend logic** (such as APIs or custom middleware) alongside your assets without needing a dedicated server.

- Serve content to users with **low latency** using **built-in caching** for faster load times for users worldwide.

- **Build full-stack applications** using Cloudflare's storage solutions, such as [R2](/r2/) for object storage, [KV](/kv/) for distributed key-value storage, [D1](/d1/) for relational databases, and [Durable Objects](/durable-objects/) for stateful, consistent storage and coordination. You can also connect to existing databases using [Hyperdrive](/hyperdrive/)

---

## Basic Workflow

> ---

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

From a high-level, here's how you can get started with deploying a simple static site on Workers:

<Steps>

> 1. Build your static assets.
>    ```sh
>    npm run build
> 	 ```
> 	 <Details header="Don't have an existing project?">
> 	 You can quickly scaffold a project using [Vite](https://vite.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project):
> 	```sh
> 	npm create vite@latest
> 	```
> 	And follow the prompts! For first-timers, just select `vanilla` as your template.
> 	</Details>
> 2. Add and configure a Wrangler configuration file (`wrangler.toml` or `wrangler.json`)
> 
>     	<WranglerConfig>
>     	```toml
>     	name = "my-static-site"
>     	compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
>     [assets]
>     directory = "./dist"
>     ```
>     	</WranglerConfig>
> 
>     	In this configuration file, you define the **directory** where Cloudflare can find your built assets that need to be uploaded. To do this, we've added an `[assets]` block, and specified the `directory` as `dist/`.
> 
> 3. Deploy with Wrangler
> 
>    ```sh
>    npx wrangler deploy
>    ```
> 
>    And let Cloudflare Workers handle asset uploading, routing, and caching automatically!

Reviewer 3: Mix of spaces and tabs
```suggestion
1. Build your static assets.
 	```sh
	npm run build
	```
	<Details header="Don't have an existing project?">
	You can quickly scaffold a project using [Vite](https://vite.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project):
	```sh
	npm create vite@latest
	```
	And follow the prompts! For first-timers, just select `vanilla` as your template.
	</Details>
2. Add and configure a Wrangler configuration file (`wrangler.toml` or `wrangler.json`)
	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		```
	</WranglerConfig>

	In this configuration file, you define the **directory** where Cloudflare can find your built assets that need to be uploaded. To do this, we've added an `[assets]` block, and specified the `directory` as `dist/`.

3. Deploy with Wrangler
	```sh
	npx wrangler deploy
	```

	And let Cloudflare Workers handle asset uploading, routing, and caching automatically!
```

Within this deployment, the Worker has two primary responsibilies:

1. **Asset handling**
2. **Running custom logic**

### Asset handling

Static asset hosting on Workers allows you to serve files such as HTML, JavaScript, CSS, images, and other resources directly from Cloudflare's global network. This setup eliminates the need for a traditional web server, simplifying deployment and optimizing performance.

The **assets directory** specified in your Wrangler configuration file is central to this design. During deployment, Wrangler automatically uploads the files from this directory to Cloudflare's infrastructure. Once deployed, requests for these assets are routed efficiently to locations closest to your users.

This approach ensures that static files like `index.html`, JavaScript bundles, stylesheets, and images are served with minimal latency. Workers efficiently handle file resolution, meaning they serve files as-is from the defined directory, or return a fallback response (such as an error or default page) when a requested file is not found.

<Aside type="tip">

> 	You can control how assets are served, how unmatched routes are handled, as
> 	well as override routing behavior in your Wrangler configuration file.
> 
>     For example, if you have a Single Page Application and want to fallback to
>     `index.html` for unmatched routes, you can define this in your [Wrangler configuration](/workers/static-assets/routing/#alternate-configuration-options):
> 
>     	<WranglerConfig>
>     	```toml
>     	name = "my-static-site"
>     	compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
>     	[assets]
>     	directory = "./dist"
>     	not_found_handling = "single-page-application"
> 
>     ```
>     	</WranglerConfig>

Reviewer 3: again, mix
```suggestion
	You can control how assets are served, how unmatched routes are handled, as
	well as override routing behavior in your Wrangler configuration file.

	For example, if you have a Single Page Application and want to fallback to
	`index.html` for unmatched routes, you can define this in your [Wrangler configuration](/workers/static-assets/routing/#alternate-configuration-options):

	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"

		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		not_found_handling = "single-page-application"
		```
	</WranglerConfig>
```

- **Dynamic routing:** Inspect incoming requests and route them based on their paths or headers. For example, you can route requests to `/api` to custom API logic, while static files are automatically served from your specified directory.

- **API endpoints:** Define endpoints to handle user requests, fetch data from external APIs, or interact with databases.

- **Response modifications:** Modify responses dynamically, such as adding headers, compressing payloads, or injecting data into static content.

- **Stateful logic:** For scenarios requiring consistent state across requests, you can use [Durable Objects](/durable-objects/). Durable objects allow you to maintain state for use-cases such as real-time collaboration, session storage, global counters, and more.

<Aside type="tip">
You can change the default routing behavior (which prioritizes serving assets ahead of running Worker code) so that your [Worker code runs before an asset is served](/workers/static-assets/routing/#invoking-worker-script-ahead-of-assets/).

For example, if you want to protect an asset behind authentication, you can override the routing behavior in your Wrangler configuration file:

>     	<WranglerConfig>
>     	```toml
>     	name = "my-static-site"
>     	compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"
>     	[assets]
>     	directory = "./dist"
>     	binding = "ASSETS"
>     	experimental_serve_directly = false
>     ```
>     	</WranglerConfig>

Reviewer 3: Mixed + run_worker_first
```suggestion
	<WranglerConfig>
		```toml
		name = "my-static-site"
		compatibility_date = "2025-01-01"

		[assets]
		directory = "./dist"
		binding = "ASSETS"
		run_worker_first = true
		```
	</WranglerConfig>
```

</Aside>

### Caching static assets

> Cloudflare provides automatic caching for static assets across its network, ensuring fast delivery to users worldwide. When a static asset is requested, it is automatically cached for future requests.

Reviewer 3: may be worth mentioning it's stored with tiered-cache so if a subsequent request hits a nearby colo, it's still served very fast from that initial nearby colo
